\section{Implementation Hints}

This section provides information about how we could implement rich pointers
in the context of C++11. We approach it by first writing a library solution
that approximates the functionality using available language features in
C++11. We then show what the limitations of the language and runtime are along
the way and work towards removing the limitations.

Here we present a first crack at providing rich pointer support using a
template we''ll call \verb+rich_ptr+. The goal of \verb+rich_ptr+ is to
provide functionality for the definition and registration of types and objects
of these types in the same object. Instances of \verb+rich_ptr+ will follow
pointer semantics similar to what \verb+shared_ptr+ provides without the
reference counting capability.

In \autoref{appendix:rich_ptr-interface} we show what the interface for a
\verb+rich_ptr+ would look like. The minimal interface is by design meant to
mimic how pointers work. It provides overloads to the dereference operator and
the member access operator, and a member function \verb+rich_ptr::get()+ which
returns the bare underlying pointer.

We then supply a means to programmatically defining type descriptors following
the already presented type descriptors by hand in an attempt at a library-only
approach.

\subsection{Library-Only Approach}

Is there a way to implement support for rich pointers using just C++11
features? We explore how this would look like in
\autoref{appendix:rich_ptr-annotations} which shows how this could be done
with macros. Immediately there are a few limitations which we can identify:

\begin{itemize}

 \item Without compiler assistance, users will have to annotate types that
they want to generate metadata for with preprocessor macros. The syntax of the
macros typically deviates too much from the normal C++ syntax for class
definitions.

 \item Because you have to consciously annotate the type you’re registering,
this makes it hard to manage especially if the type’s definition is not
something you can change (i.e. when using a third-party provided library).

 \item This will not properly handle dynamically loaded libraries at runtime
and will be at the mercy of the implementation and platform. Because
preprocessor macros are typically only valid very early on in the compilation
process, the annotations are no longer available in the translation unit.

\end{itemize}

With a library-only implementation we also cannot do the following reliably:

\begin{itemize}

  \item \textbf{Safe runtime type invalidation.} This will require two things:

  \begin{itemize}

   \item A standardized registry of types available and managed at runtime.

   \item Well defined module initialization/cleanup semantics and interfaces.

  \end{itemize}

  \item \textbf{Seamless invalidation at runtime.} Because of the linkage and
  concurrency issues introduced by standard-allowed optimizations, it is not
  guaranteed that library-defined invalidation routines can be protected. The
  worst case scenario is that code paths and branches that can be optimized
  appropriately using normal pointers as opposed to rich pointers are in
  jeopardy of behaving much poorly.

  \item \textbf{Safe runtime type creation.} For JIT compilers at the moment,
  only code and data that’s accessible through opaque pointers (\verb+void *+)
  and rigidly-defined function pointers that have primitive return types can
  be integrated into the hosting runtime context. New types cannot be safely
  registered and invalidated without explicit runtime support of type
  registration.

  \item \textbf{Automatic descriptor generation.} With the library approach
  types need to be explicitly registered and annotated. The compiler on the
  other hand has all the information it needs and can generate the type
  information at compilation time and can do so only for types that are used
  in rich pointers and types pointed to by rich pointers.

\end{itemize}

A previous version of this paper (N3340) was proposing to add a new pointer type. The downside to that approach would be that the work required to change the standard defining a new pointer type is not enough to justify the gains.

This version of the paper introduces a hybrid approach which shows what rich pointers would look like with a library interface (\verb+rich_ptr+) while introducing some compiler assistance functionality (\verb+type_descriptor+ and \verb+metadata+).

\subsection{Library Interface + Compiler Assist}

The library interface reduces the reliance on changes to the C++ language and
allows alternate implementations. There are a number of parts to the library
implementation that are implementation-defined:

\begin{itemize}

 \item Runtime registration/lookup of type descriptors.

 \item Invalidation of type descriptors.

 \item The actual storage mechanism for the handle to a type descriptor for
each instance of a \verb+rich_ptr+.

 \item How type-lists are implemented in the case of \verb+metadata+ and
associated types.

\end{itemize}

Please refer to \autoref{appendix:rich_ptr-interface} for all the details of
the proposed \verb+rich_ptr+ type.

The reason for implementation-defined runtime registration/lookup
implementations is a consequence of the reality where different platforms
provide different implementations of dynamic linkage. Without a standardized
facility for defining shared libraries or shared objects there's no choice but
to leave out these specifications to be defined by the implementation. The
same reasoning applies to invalidation of type descriptors.

One approach to the mapping between a pointer and a type descriptor in the
face of invalidation at runtime is to have a token representing an
intermediate mapping. This allows an implementation to provide two-stage
lookup and to maintain a single definition of valid type descriptors in a
globally accessible map.

An implementation is also allowed to tag objects in memory (similar to how
RTTI is done) to encode the token to the object. Some compilers already encode
debugging information as part of the translation unit -- this metadata can be
used at runtime as well in debug builds. Other implementation approaches for
runtime introspection are possible and the paper tries not to preclude
potentially valid implementations.

\subsection{Compiler Assist}

There are two main parts where compiler assistance comes in: automatic
generation of type descriptors, and static metadata. The \verb+metadata+
metafunction yields a compiler-generated type that acts as a handle to a
type's definition. This same metadata is meant to be consistent with the
runtime type descriptors.

The handle is implementation-defined and is not required to be a valid C++
type. A whole family of traits associated to the handle type are also defined.

\subsection{Metaprogramming}

This paper relies on the current state of the art of using template metaprogramming to provide the interface for the traits that can be applied to the metadata handle. Unfortunately this interface is severely limited. One potential way to alleviate the need for template metaprogramming is to extend constexpr functions to support pure constexpr functions.

With pure constexpr functions:

\begin{itemize}

  \item We can define functions which have absolutely no runtime side-effects.

  \item We can use imperative control structures that operate at compile time.

  \item Implement generative type functions.

  \item Treat literals as first class objects when performing type-system checks (e.g. compare string equivalence per translation unit).

\end{itemize}

Although pure constexpr functions will make metaprogramming easier, it is not a necessity in providing the rich pointer functionality.

\subsection{Inhibiting Type Descriptor Generation}

An the Kona meeting questions were raised about whether it should be possible
to inhibit type descriptor generation. There are a number of approaches that
can be taken for type descriptor generation:

\begin{itemize}

 \item \textbf{Default inhibit, annotate for generation (opt-in generation).}
This is the conservative approach. This makes it really hard to get the
utility to be useful to as many people as possible when implementations get
around to supporting the proposed facilities.

 \item \textbf{Default generate, annotate for exclusion (opt-out generation).}
This is the aggressive approach which would turn it on for all types except
for certain types. The suggestion is to have this be controlled by type
annotations which should be supported by implementations.

 \item \textbf{Implementation defined.} This could be made optional similar to
how some implementations actually enable/disable RTTI or exception support.

\end{itemize}

Of the three above the preferred solution is to define an opt-out mechanism using type annotations.